---
layout: post
title: "Air India"
description: "Sitting next to woman in Air India"
categories: [creatives]
redirect_from:
  - /2017/08/15/
---
A woman is sitting next to him. Almost an hour into the flight, none of them felt the need to strike a conversation. Both of them are occupied among themselves. But he has been impressed by her demeanour, the way she carried herself.<br>She is wearing a normal pink coloured kurta over a white choodidaar. Her hairs are tied neatly behind her. Inspite of all this simplicity she has an aura of elegance.


He saw her taking a sip of tea while reading something on her phone. Just like he is carrying a book, a book from which he read only a couple of pages before getting back to capturing his thoughts, she is carrying a kindle with her.<br>
He can assume that she must be an avid reader, with her to-read list always overflowing due to paucity of time; for she hasn't opened her kindle even once which rests in her lap. She has been busy with completing her article(s).

Finally she decides to open her kindle and resume where she paused. But before that, she folds both of her legs and finds a sweet spot. This is going to take some time, and to immerse herself completely in her book she needs to sit comfortably. <br>

He wonders what kind of stuff did she read ? Was it a political article that she was reading on her phone, or was it something throwing light on human psyche ? What kind of books have adorned her shelf ? Does she like drama, as he does, or she is into quenching her thirst about the world, for example getting to know how different creatures behave in different situations? On this flight itself, he read in his book how unlike higher animals whose heart pulsates with increased energy, a snail's heart throbs slowly in similar situation. Who knows if she is unlocking some knowledge which is not common enough. <br>
But when he observes her spending time on kindle, he sees a smile on her face which exuberates satisfaction, peace. And he knows that whatever she is reading, she is enjoying that.