Loneliness became a part of his life. There is no one to talk with about his fears, about his struggles. He misses the girls he fell for in the past. Past, that’s the key word here, the girl(s) he misses is a memory of the past time, she would have changed significantly by now, she would have become a different person. He wish someone to be around, but he knows that her present form can’t fill in the void. It’s not only the change in them, it’s the change in him as well. Being himself, he is detached from those changes inside. It’s only when he’ll encounter her will he realise that this elixir is not for him.

Realising that he is going to be alone for a while is as unsettling a thought. As soon as he embraces this absolute, irrespective of the number of times he has done that in the past, the intimidating truth that he has to live for a while like this, this bubble in which he stands isolated from the world is going to stay, the truth becomes all-encompassing. <br>
The bright of that light is blinding, it forces you to search for some escape, some cover, some way to close the door that just opened. But there is no darkness around to take you in, towards oblivion.

You have two choices. Either turn your back towards the truth, making the past your present, cursing your future to be just a shadow of your past. Or you keep pursuing your north star, knowing that you’ll be scorched when you will emerge on the other side of this journey. <br>
You don’t know if the present’s truth will still hold true after this crusade. You know the pastures will be greener after this journey is over, for that's the only reason you have been walking. But you don’t know if the new reality will have a sun as strong as the one in the sky right now, or it’ll be a cool day in the month of spring.