---
layout: post
title: "Hearbeat"
description: "Going to a cafe for work early morning."
redirect_from:
  - /2021/12/04/
---

It was a typical Tuesday morning. The French Press was already prepared, he was fixing the Omelette now - Sunny Side Up as requested. This was almost a daily routine - by this time he was preparing coffee and breakfast for customers. Today, however, he was trying to be his best.<br>He didn't know the name, but this one customer was a regular. She had a habit of arriving earlier than everyone, sometimes even before the opening time. As she had been coming here for almost 2 years now, he had started making an exception for her by letting her in while the board on the door still displayed "Closed" on the outside. In the mornings when he heard the chime of the 4 small bells hanging on the door even while he was prepping up his kitchen, he instinctively knew that it's her, or so he hoped.<br><br>
The same had happened today. He was on his toes, his knees bent with a yellow notepad and a pen in his hands, checking on the inventory in the display counter when he heard the bells ring. Still squatting, he looked across from the glass and saw her standing at the door. She was dressed in formals, but it was very early for the office. The cafe used to open at 7 AM, and when he looked at the clock hanging above the door, he realised she was 15 minutes early. <br>She stood at the door for around 15 seconds, removing her gloves and unzipping her Maroon Puffer - it was hot inside, the heaters working for almost 45 minutes now. When he stood up, he saw her scanning the place, and wondered if she was looking for him. She was wearing black Moto Boots over blue jeans. A red sweater was peeking from beneath her jacket. She was removing her muffler when their eyes met. She found him, smiled and moved towards the counter.

<span style="color:blue">"Good Morning !! I am afraid I am early again. Do you want me to wait outside ?" </span><br>
<span style="color:green">"Morning mam. I am still preparing the kitchen and my partner is running late. It'll take some time to get your order. If you don't mind waiting, you can take a seat."</span>, he said pointing towards the best spot in the cafe, especially for this weather. It was still early, but the sun would be up in half an hour and he knew her black hair would shine brightly in the sunlight if she were to take the chair suggested by him.<br>
<span style="color:blue">"Oh, that's great. Yeah, I am fine with waiting. I have some work to finish. Should I place the order now or later ?"</span><br>
<span style="color:green">"You can tell me what you need. I'll bring it up once it is be ready. It might take around 45 minutes."</span>

The Omelette was ready now. He placed the breakfast on the serving tray and made a move towards her. Apart from her, there was only one more customer in the cafe, seated somewhere in between the counter and the woman. Walking on the wooden floor, he paused for a minute and presented the man with the menu. After that, he started to serve her her order. <br>
The sun must have risen, but the fog wasn't clear yet. He could see the traffic on the road through the glass wall, but he couldn't make out the building on the other side. He gently placed each item on the table, mouthing what he was serving. <span style="color:green">"Your French Press, Omelette Sunny Side Up, and water. Enjoy your breakfast." </span><br>She just nodded, her eyes fixed on the screen, her fingers moving on the keyboard fervently. He hesitated for a moment, and then started walking towards the counter. Only if he was equipped with a device which could echo a person's heart beat, he would have heard her's pumping as furiously as his.

<br><br>
Familiar places and familiar people helped her stay focused and composed. That's why when she figured that she needed a break from the setting, she zeroed-in on this place. She had been awake the entire night, giving final touch to the script. They were to start the next phase of development next Monday and finalising this part of the script was critical. After taking a hot shower, she dressed up and locked the small but cozy top-floored 2 BHK. It was freezing outside, nothing visible beyond a few steps. Winters was her favorite time of the year and she enjoyed every bit of her walk from her building towards her Civic.<br>
Because of the fog, her drive was a bit longer for this time of the day. Such subtle details were, however, not of her concern right now - her mind was still on the script, shaping up the climax. She reached the complex and parked her car. The parking lot was deserted except for a few scooters and a Splendor; not that she identified with the model. It was only a motorcycle for her,  she had preferred her bicycle and public transport in her college days.

The barista was sweet enough to let her in and work even while she was 15 minutes early. When she was asked what she'd like to have, the order came up automatically. She didn't notice that she had decided with the Omelette the moment she had picked this place at her house. The choice of the coffee was obvious, she needed to survive the day and French Press provided her the exact amount of caffeine she needed.<br>
She walked towards the table looking over the road. A glass wall separated her table and the balcony through which one could witness the hustle of an important road in South Delhi. On the other side of the road was one of the most prestigious engineering institutes of the country. She couldn't see the building though - the fog was still the same as it was when she had started driving. <br>
She placed her woollens on one of the four chairs and moved to the other side. Still standing, she started spreading her paraphernalia over the table. Keys of the car had to go back to her bag with her wallet. Her phone was placed adjacent to her laptop, while her yellow notepad - from which she could refer to her notes whenever she needed it - was placed on the other side. She pulled out her earphones and plugged them to her Mac, any external noise was a distraction. Rolling up the sleeves of her loose sweater, she entered the password and tried to resume where she had left.


It wasn't as if she started typing immediately, it takes time to settle in, to gather your thoughts, to align your mind. It's like resuming your road trip after stopping for a break. You don't hit the highway immediately after entering the car. You make yourself comfortable, adjust the driving seat, pull down the handbrake, fidget with your phone to find the right playlist, start the navigation, take a sip of water. Only once you are all set, you press the clutch, start the ignition and slowly take out your car from the driveway. It takes a minute or two to put your car in the fifth gear and move to the first lane, at which point you tell yourself, "Now we are talking".<br>
Similarly, she had to get comfortable before she could start typing. With the maestro playing sitar in her ears, she looked around herself. There was no one in the cafe apart from her and the barista on the other side of the counter with his back turned to her. She liked coming here, they had done a good job with the lights, it was bright and warm. The balcony had some tables and chairs and was generally occupied by people who wanted to smoke. Looking at the ashtray and matchbox placed on one of the outside tables for a while, she figured how she would like the conversation to be played out between the two protagonists. It took her some time, and when she was ready, she moved her eyes towards the screen, flexed her fingers and started typing.<br><br>
Around 30 minutes had passed since she had been typing. She had referred to her notes not a single time, the outline on paper was created just to help her structure her thoughts. The notes were just a crude manifestation of what she was to end up writing, whatever she wanted to be poured out was in all her mind. Her fingers had moved at a varying pace over the course of this past half an hour. She liked it most when she didn't have to consciously articulate something, the words magically appearing on the screen; as if her fingers, the keyboard and screen had a secret understanding which her mind was not aware of. All she was aware was of this state of bliss when her fingers were moving out of their own volition and she was just cognizant of the activity being acted in front of her. She felt that she was not the doer, but the observer.<br>
This was one such spell of her writing spree. From the corner of her eyes, she could see the waiter moving towards her from the counter. She was however too occupied to pay him any attention - the two protagonists had met for the first time and had just started talking. The entire plot of the narrative was to be defined by this conversation that was being played out in her mind. She could feel her fingers the way she doesn't feel normally, every pore alive, as if an electric current was flowing through her palm. She had timed the concert's recording perfectly - the maestro playing in her ears was reaching the climax of his piece, just like she was. It was as if she and the sitarist were in perfect harmony, both using their fingers in tandem with each other. She just nodded at the waiter as he laid out the breakfast and left, her heart was beating 20 beats higher than average as measured by her smartwatch.