---
layout: post
title: "Afar"
description: "What you are seeking is beyond."
redirect_from:
  - /2022/07/28/
---

Your heart is bleeding, a wound just opened up. You didn't know the wound existed, you don't know what the wound is about. You cannot see it, can't touch and grope about using your hands. It's just there, beyond your reach; you can feel it. You light a candle and cast about for the bruise's existence. You don't see anything beyond the area the candle illuminates. <br>You wonder if there's anything beyond the darkness. You try to find a way, but you don't see a path. The candle fails you, it is unable to illuminate anything beyond its sphere of influence. You are tired and completely clueless. You give up the effort and return to _normal_ life.

  

You feel the tug of that wound again. Now, you try to find comfort. You talk to people, you message those you haven't talked to in a while. Your defence mechanism kicks in and you mould your words to make them laugh. You tell them that it's late and you'd like to retire. You listen to songs, foraging the lyrics you haven't heard in a long time. You find a song that touches your heart. It's in a language you don't understand completely. The singer's voice melts your soul. You want to sing along, the music player enables that. Not soaking in the meaning, however, makes you flutter away.

  

You flip pages of books you have read earlier and go back to the sections you have highlighted. You instantly connect to the characters whose lives you lived with them. You understand their pain, you cry for their loss. It's helps lessen your pain, but still, it's there. You switch to movies, recall the most moving scenes you have seen. They are convincing, but the lack of build-up ruins the comfort you could have received.

You are seeking something. You are seeking words that mean something. Words that convey something profound. What, you don't know. You have been seeking that in lyrics, novels, dialogues. Maybe it's the other way round. The words have been seeking you.