---
layout: post
title: "Obligation"
description: ""
date: 22-11-26

---
A little more than 2 weeks back I had a meeting with a friend who has moved overseas - we try to talk once in a fortnight. Initially these meetings started as a learning exercise - each wanted to explore ML closely, and the field of Computer Vision piqued interest in both of us. We thought a collective effort would speed up our pursuit.<br>
From day 1, the calls had the quality of profoundness. With each iteration, however, the nature of calls changed. They became warmer, more comforting, and shunned the quality of a meeting, something agenda-driven. Each conversation was more free-flowing than the previous one. We started talking more and more about what’s happening in our lives, exchanging notes and wisdom from the experiences we have had. These calls transitioned us from mere colleagues/ex-colleagues (that's how I knew her before these calls started) to good friends.<br><br>
I was telling her how I find it insanely difficult, rather impossible, to push myself through when I feel I “should” complete a task and this obligation is singular or primary reason to finish the task in question. I was recounting one such event which happened a few days ago. This incident was different because I was able to get over that feeling (of obligation) by not focusing on the task at all. This narrative stirred her curiosity and she asked what exactly that transition looked like. I was unable to explain the intricacies of that journey to my satisfaction and eventually we moved onto some other topic.<br><br>
I, however, kept thinking about that question. I believed that this was an important transition and it should be captured, for my own good if not for anyone else - I have a habit of going back to my old journals and reading what I was feeling/thinking. It sometimes helps me find patterns, pitfalls and mistakes, sometimes helps me revise certain lessons I had learnt.<br><br>
In the past ~3 years, I have realised that if something is pushed down on me without taking my buying into that task, I am not able to put my heart into it. I literally loose all energy and what looks like a small mound of mud turns into a vertical hill. Earlier I was able to push-through such situations, but since the past 12-15 months, I have lost that skill as well. It kills me to get over with the work at hand. I exhaust myself by obsessing on that piece without putting in any actual productive effort. More recently, my body has also started giving up. I feel this extreme physical exhaustion which compels me to find a bed and lie down for some time. <br>
Looking at this a bit closely, I have understood that the process of pushing myself has started tiring me. The process has become so exhausting because all the time I think of reaching the destination - completing the task in this case. The end goal, however, is not to reach the destination - reaching the destination is one of the goals. The bigger goal, the superior goal, is to enjoy the process, to feel joyous during the pursuit, to feel fulfilled while putting time, mind, and body into the grind. That has been possible for me only when I am curious as to how to do instead of how fast; when I am absorbed in figuring out the path instead of stressing or dreaming what I'll be doing once I have climbed the top.<br><br>
That day - the day about which I was telling my friend - my manager was busy with some non-negotiable work. I was new to the organisation and needed some hand-holding to begin with. As noone was available to help me out, I was given a menial task which didn’t have an immediate impact. To put it in other words, there was no reason to get it done apart from the fact I was supposed to get it done.<br>
Till now, till this day in question that is, my strategy in such <em>obligation-laced</em> scenarios had been to divide the task into smaller parts - reduce the problem into smaller and easier chunks. I used to have conversations with myself - negotiate and promise rewards upon completion of the task, upon each chunk. I used to give myself breaks and hope that the irrational part will honour the faith my rational part had shown in it. Sometimes these worked, sometimes not. One theme that is common in all these approaches is that I never lost sight on the task, completing the task always occupied a significant, and maybe the dominant place, in my brain.<br>
That day I explored giving up on the idea of completing the task. I knew that my manager is busy and this is not a high-priority task which will be tracked immediately. I bargained with myself to let go of the nagging compulsion - there were no consequences as such of not completing that task, and from past experience, I knew that I won’t be able to complete it. It made sense to not stress over something which I knew won’t happen.<br>
I took some time to embrace that change - my mind is not wired to give up on unfinished tasks, the tasks that I am supposed to, obligated to complete. Slowly and steadily, I was able to get out of that mental space, to not entertain that OCDish pressure.<br>
Once I was able to clear my mind and be okay with what I was not doing, I literally felt energy pumping back up in my body, rushing in my bloodstream as if I was injected with a vial of liquid energy. I no longer felt the need to stay in the bed, I engaged in different things of my interest. The most surprising thing about that day, however, was that after a couple of hours, I picked up and completed the task which had brought me to my knees earlier in the day. At some point in time during that day, I realised that this is not such a big deal and in fact the effort required is minimum.<br><br>
“Letting Go”, the crux of previous section, however, sounds trite. Every self-help book, every motivational video espouses the same idea. It’s like asking a kid to have patience without explaining how to have patience - there is no element of showing, it’s just telling. It’s like presenting someone with a sealed book promising great wisdom in the title - what use is that if you can’t open and read it ? That’s why I also wanted to talk about what I do in such situations. When I failed to explain what the process looked like, I chewed over this question for a few days. What I realised is that letting go is not something you wake up one day and decide to do - it’s a skill; and like every skill, it needs practice. I have been practicing it for some time, that day was perhaps my first jab at succeeding.<br>
The idea is to remove your focus from the task at hand - shun the task, forget about it. Focus elsewhere, but not somewhere which requires your brain to process information at a pace you can't regulate - like Netflix or social media. You need to give your brain time to think and process the thoughts that are in your mind - thoughts a level below the surface. The reason why you are not able to focus, why you are not able to push through.<br>
I believe that there is always an unresolved emotion which makes you restless - whether you sense this restlessness or not. Emotions also have a habit of layering up - the actual underlying emotion could be something else (sometimes emotions), and it would produce something completely seemingly unrelated outside. For example, a hurry to get done something and/or fear can be base emotions, resulting in anxiety on the outside. We generally end up focusing solely on fixing, getting rid of anxiety without understanding the source.<br>
1. What I do is write the thoughts that are in my mind - this is generally a cribbing/venting out session. I also write about my goals, what I want to accomplish but have been unable to - that reiteration of my goals keeps me focused. Or I go back to my previous journals and read what I was feeling at any earlier moment. 
2. I also meditate - just focus on the breath, the mind keeps wandering, and I keep bringing it back. Meditation helps me center myself, get some perspective.
3. Playing the game of "kabaddi" with the problem at times helps. You approach the problem, but come back exploring just 25% of the problem. You spend some time in your comfort zone, regroup your mental faculties - that’s a under the hood process, you can’t force it by sheer will - and once you have the required energy, you go back to the problem. This time, you target 50% of the problem statement and come back again. After each iteration, you realize that the overlap between your comfort zone and the problem zone has increased. Eventually, the problem/task at hand gets inside your comfort zone, post which you can just sail through.


Sometimes one of these tricks work while the other doesn't, sometimes none of them work whatsoever. The fundamental idea of taking away focus from the task at hand stays - as long as I keep fixating on the obstacle, I won't be able to find ways around the obstacle.<br><br>
If you do these activities long enough, like writing, meditation, or exercise of any form, you start listening to what your body is telling you. More than often, my breath is deeper, I feel my heart rate higher. Though my smartwatch sometimes agrees and sometimes not, I always trust what my body tells me. The goal is to be in sync with the body; once the mind and body are in sync, the mind can strategize to move out of that difficult space considering the limitations/requirements of the body.<br>
I am not sure if this strategy, this approach is making sense - specially to them who haven't yet made contact with themselves. Over the past few years, I have been meditating regularly and have been running long distance. With the help of these two activities combined, I have developed that knack of figuring out when my mind doesn’t resonate with what my body is feeling.<br><br>
All of this requires time, patience, and belief. The three mentioned above are not necessarily in the order of importance - they are all equals with no trait playing the role of 'primus inter pares'.