---
layout: post
title: "Gyani"
description: ""
date: 22-09-13

---

I have spent a lot of time alone in the last two and a half years. It seemed difficult at that time, now from a distance, I am able to see certain positive outcomes of spending so much time by myself. The negative outcome of the aforementioned positive outcome, which I have observed in the past 3 odd months, is that I have become what we used to call someone in our collega a gyani. The word is used to address someone who is knowledgeable and someone who’s words should be heard. As a result, the above word also symbolises someone who is respected by the people around them.

In my college, however this word was used as slang for one person who displayed himself to be a know-it-all but wasn’t, who gave various unsolicited advices without having acted upon those. In other words, he was someone who was irritable and someone who didn’t had any friends - in the spirit of the word.

I have observed in the past 3 odd months that I have become someone who is dropping advices to everyone I is pass by and who tries to get into a somewhat involved, intellectual conversation. With the people with whom I cannot have the kind of conversations I like to have, I rubbish them as mere nobles, as a result of which, I don’t value them in my mind. What this leads to is to waive them off physically as well, but without meaning to because the noble narrative is in my unconscious mind. 

This change, is not a good sign. If I don’t walk my words, people in a few days would start relating to a hypocrite, someone whose job is to give unsolicited advice to anyone and everyone. If I walk my words but still end up having this noble narrative playing in my mind, I’ll become arrogant and snobbish. In either case, I’ll have some characteristics of a gyani.

Understanding the perils, I have decided to strictly stop giving advice right now. There are a few important conversations I have to have with some people around me, but I’ll just keep it to that.

  

Having said that, I also don’t want this knowledge (the positive outcome) I have earned by spending so much time by myself, debating and deliberating in my mind and writing some part of that conversation, to become lost - eventually I’ll forget the lessons. Hence, I have decided to start going back to my journals starting from the time I quit my job the third time. I’ll also look at some helpful books I read in this time frame and revise my learnings using the highlights.

To synthesise all this, I’ll start writing a blog documenting what I would have read in that time frame - journals, highlights. To start with, the frequency of this blog would be once in a fortnight, but I’ll see if I can speed it up. I think that’ll be a good way to go back to what I have learned and also use the energy in a more productive way. 

  

I have been journaling for a little more than 15 years now, hence needed a start date in the middle of 2007 and 2022. The choice of August 2021 is because that was a inflection point in my life. Even though I don’t count August 2021 as the start of a new chapter in my life, it indeed marked the start of a different section of this chapter. Perhaps, the last section of this chapter. Hence I thought to start from there, and depending upon when I finish this, I’ll decide to go further back or forward. 

  

Given that this is a relatively free week, I’ll try to publish something by this Saturday, maybe just the preface, setting up the context, as in what frame I was in, where I was coming from, and why did I quit this job. Just a bit of details here and there. Post that, I will try to follow a two week cycle.

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
**