---
layout: post
title: "Justification"
description: ""
date: 23-12-28
---
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Back in December 2020, a dear friend of mine started a tradition of hosting yearly awards ceremony amongst us friends - he came up with few categories on which voting happens and the highest voted person gets that award. It's a wonderful tradition that we hold close to our heart. Among others, one great thing about this forum is that we allow each other to be vulnerable, guys share their unfiltered thoughts. In one previous edition, we spent 10-15 mins discussing how the advent of baldness has affected self-confidence amongst people. It sounded funny to me when we were discussing this, but later I realized this is a shining example of the freedom we give ourselves and each other - *small* things have *big* impact. Yesterday was the fourth edition of CARE (**C**halante **A**wards for **R**elative **E**xcellence, Chalante being the name of our group 😏). And that is the trigger for this post, though the thought of writing these thoughts captured my mind much earlier. <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In every meeting, we have this section where each person reflects on their year - it serves as a group update given that everyone doesn't know everything about others; regular nxn updates gets affected in bigger groups, specially when boys become men😌, and time is scarce. <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;When the section started yesterday, I was excited and was looking forward to my turn - 365 days are lot many days, and I had few memorable experiences here and there - I had tried and failed, but I had tried. As I saw all 7 speak one after another, my enthusiasm went down. It happened because I saw every person speaking about their experiences, choices made with a kind of confidence which I was not feeling this particular evening. I was wary if what I say will resonate with these people, will my thoughts make sense; will my learnings be received with interest and approval, or they'll be looked at with skepticism and attributed to be incoherent. As a result, I ended up saying vague abstract things. <br>

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My job has been comparatively relaxed, and as a result I have had more time in the recent past. Deep reflections, scores of unburdened hours spread across weeks and months, and seeking help enabled me to understand that the opinion others will have has a huge impact on the decisions I make daily, both short-term and long-term. What others think about me is a variable I always consider when deciding anything, and the weight given to this variable is very high. Generally, these are those people who are doing better than me professionally, they come from premium institutions, they work at Big companies with a proven track record - this is the sole metric how ~~we~~ I have learned to define success. <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Couple of hours before the awards, I and a friend of mine (from the above group) had an involved discussion - I was seeking his opinion on an action I was going to take and the underlying thought process. He made me understand that my entire chain of thinking in the above case isn't following a logical pattern, that there were gaps, I was made aware of the blind spots. Consequently if I move forward, the action won't be the best to take. It was his opinion of course, but his rational thinking convinced me. What happened next is that I now started wondering what must he be thinking about me - how can be my friend such a stupid person ? And because I *lost* a battle of thoughts, I started doubting myself. That is what ultimately precipitaed in the life updates section in CARE.<br><br>

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I decided to quit my job recently, and it's a huge decision I have taken. Not the act of quitting specifically, but the choice of not finding another job for few months makes it huge. More so, because this is going to be my third break in four years. <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While my training in life has been to take the safe path always, I am taking a risk here. Conversation with my manager around leaving the org took place on Dec 14 and I felt extremely relieved, light as a feather when we decided my last working day would be Jan 31st. However, I went into self-doubt spiral in the following days. I am taking a hit at multiple levels, all of which I was aware of during the decision making process.
1. Financial Hit<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a. I am leaving at a time when my appraisal is due in 3/4 months. The facts that I didn't negotiate when I was getting hired (I was coming from my second break and the tech industry was staring at a correction), and having done well in the past few months on a new responsibility I took in July, I am/was expecting a significant raise. <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b. Apart from loss of incoming savings monthly, I'll be burning savings.
2. It's not a high-pressure job and the way we work, I have ample time on my hands after carrying out my daily responsibilities. I can manage (at least on paper) 2-3 hours of personal work daily with a relaxed, flexible routine. I can (again, on paper) manage preparing for the next job while working on the current one easily. 
3. This will lead to another career break on my resume, and though these phases are finding acceptance in professional setting, it's still something you have to convince your prospective employer.
4. And most importantly, **people's perception**, *log kya kahenge*. 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;If I am to ask any *rational* person and give them the above data points before letting them make an opinion, s/he will ask me to at least wait till appraisal and then resign. It's stupid to do otherwise.<br>

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Torn between two opposing ideas, I spent reasonable time analysing the arguments and counter-arguments my mind produced. I started noting down what's causing my anxieties and started asking relevant and hard/difficult questions to ensure I don't end up doing anything silly. When I started scribbling down my thoughts, I also had a very strong desire to structure them and publish them - either on my blog or in my personal journal. <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I am choosing the former, primarily because I think (and have heard various people say) that vulnerability is a strength, not a weakness. The more we are closed, the more control we cede to fear. I am not going to keep this a secret to be shared with a select few, if at all. I'll lay my fears bare to see them in broad daylight, I'll throw down the gauntlet and not surrender.<br><br>


&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So the question is why do I need a breather, why can't I hop on to the next one if I am unhappy here or not aligned with the company. Let me first address all 4 concerns mentioned above and then add a few more reasons why this is necessary:
1. Why this *irrational* step ?<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a. I know that money and having a dependable career trajectory are important; not only important, I **want** a handsome salary, I **want** a respectable position in the company I work at. However, these should not come at a cost of constant pain (of any kind), few prerequisites have to be met before I move to these. It's something like Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs - you don't care for self-fulfillment needs unless you have the psychological needs met. If you are not happy on a daily basis, if you cringe at the thought of going through the daily routine when you wake up, then there is something fundamentally wrong with how you are living your life. Money is not the variable I want to optimise for right now, not the variable I can optimise right now.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b. I suffer from a Hyper Responsibility Syndrome. I am not sure if that's a medical term, nor has any licensed professional given me this label. What I mean by the above is I am someone who is very righteous, to an extent where it has started affecting me negatively. Though my work doesn't require my full-time presence and I can log off for 2-3 hours after setting up the house in order, and then log off for another after a health-check in the middle of the day; I feel obligated to be available for the entire time. I feel morally responsible for going the extra mile at a fast pace even when nothing of that sort is expected of me. Given that I manage a team of ~12 people plus I am the face of the team, I feel I am ethically supposed to make sure the machinery doesn't come to a halt because of my absence. What instagram and facebook does to people, Slack did to me - I am constantly checking for messages. This led to being in a constant alert state without any alarms being raised. I tried few times to work on personal projects side by side, but I couldn't handle 2 orthogonal endeavours simultaneously.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c. As long I have a story to tell and am honest, I think I'll be able to convince prospective employer. Good people and companies look out for passionate folks to work with, people who are open to take risks and fail. Independent thinkers will never face dearth of opportunities - they'll create their own if required. Eventually, it'll boil down to finding the best fit. Worst case scenario, I'll have to start at a position which is junior to my current one. If it comes to that, I am willing to pay that price, but not the current one. Also, it's a problem I'll deal with when it surfaces.  <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d. Log to hamesha kuch na kuch kahenge hi. Majority of my decisions (unknowingly) have been driven by how they will affect my social standing. I want to follow my heart this time, not my mind. In my heart, I know this is the best path for me.
2. I have had the good fortune of being around smart peers since 9th Grade - 2 decades now. In the group of 8 people above (Chalante), 5 went to one or the other IIT (I wasn't one of them), another did his second graduation from UCSF and the last is on a fast promo track (if I remember correctly, second time) working for a huge govt organization.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I was surrounded by high-achievers during 6 early years of my career - both at flat and in office, crème de la crème during their JEE years. It has been a blessing, I have learned lot from them. But it has also been a curse. Eager to impress them and ensure they think of me as an equal, I mistook their priorities as gold, adopted their personality while suppressing mine. I was never competitive, I became obsessed with being better everyday, I started chasing goals like never before. And when I couldn't move forward, I stressed about not achieving them, constantly thinking about the "lost opportunity". I stifled myself so that when others see me, they see a reflection of themselves and like me. <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I stopped living with these people and came home during Covid, but I brought these personality traits with me, they were like slime clinging to my personality. I left these people in 3D space, but they were present in my mental space, always judging me for what I am about to do. It was not their fault, I am not shedding a negative light on these people - a lot of them are very good friends, for life. There was a void inside which got filled, had it not been these people, there would have been others - same qualities or different we'll never know. <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So these characteristics defined how I think, how I spent every second. In professional setting I was always running at full throttle, for I was trained (and consistently fed myself relevant content) in hustle culture. I stopped enjoying work on a daily basis and always thought about the goals to be achieved, mountains to be climbed. The fact that boundaries between private and personal life were blurred didn't help, it only added fuel to the fire. With porous boundaries, this fire found it's way home - I started listening podcasts instead of music, while chosing a book to read I wondered if it is going to help me get better, I can't watch sticoms coz I think it's a waste of time. In short, I have been on an optimization spree and in that spree, the joy of learning a craft got lost.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With that mental pattern, whenever I tried working on changing my career track (yes, I did try to multi-task), I couldn't sustain. Whenever I was intrigued by an tangential idea and tried exploring it further, a mental voice told me that this is a waste of time because it doesn't help me directly in my pursuit. Getting there fastest way possible was always my goal, and whenever I was curious about something, it was added to the list of things to do. A mounting list added pressure, which made me worry and hurry more. Such a process ends at anxiety, which got better of me every single time. <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It felt like standing in the middle of circular room with few doors, each door signifying one aspiration. A huge grandfather clock's ticking sound amplified in my mind - tick tock, tick tock, time is running out; I must act soon because I have to mark all these checkboxes. And the moment I took a step or two towards any of the doors, the importance of other doors magnified, the chosen door's diminished. Back to centre, evaluating which door to pick, trying to optimize on time. Tick tock, tick tock, time is running out and I must act soon. Every iteration ended with me burning out and taking few days off completely, going all binge (which lead to a guilt cycle). This cycle repeated so many times that I started identifying with and anticipating various spokes of the wheel. <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You know what is stupid and irrational ? Expecting me to function properly and move forward when I am carrying so much baggage on my shoulders. When I put all the above things in perspective, I realise I don't care if people expect me to run and juggle 3 balls in my hands, when I can't even walk properly. The thorns on the path trouble me, no one else see them in the first place. I need to get a broom to clear my path and weave boots which protect me from future gaps before I start walking again. I have to learn to control the narrative, change my thinking pattern. I have to discard a lot of harmful habits that eat me away like termites and build new ones. I have to (and want to) be driven by [love, not fear](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=su6urM6Li5k). <br>
3. There is a huge value in being excited and optimistic about the future, a value which cannot be measured, but is significant nonetheless. Decisions governed by the idea of pleasing others instead of personal satisfaction/happiness at a fundamental level chips away self-confidence, increases doubt, and generates chronic dissatisfaction and a underlying feeling of gloom. The transition from high to low during CARE is a typical example of how deeper fears play out at surface level - how my mental state changes from ecstatic to that of despondency in a matter of minutes and often. The rebound is painful and slow.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Additionally, I don't look forward to the problem statement my current employer org is targeting. The way things are being done is also different than the way I want things to move. When I get up every morning and mentally think about the day, I feel all energy sapped out from me - as if air is deflated from a ballon. <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I want to be involved, I want excitement to be a recurring theme everyday. That'll only happen when I'll be involved in things that I feel like doing. Every day will be better if I have positive reasons to continue work after working hours rather than waiting for the clock to strike 5. I want to put myself in a place where I can get in the *flow* state - something that I have been in multiple times. And to ensure such a day sounds like everyday for the most of my remaining life, I need to put in efforts and structure my life that way.
4. Most importantly, this is the way I want to solve this problem, this path is what I think and **believe** is the best path for me. I have tried the other, and have implemented various approaches to make it work. Empirical data proves that path is not working for me. All I have left is the first idea I came up with - something that was mine to begin with. Now I have reached a place where, [this is what I believe, and I am willing to die for it. Period.](https://youtu.be/cFYG-G-_ico?si=NPRu_v3Ls0ZNaDRh&t=1018) <br>


&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There are lot more thoughts that I want to capture - challenges and pitfalls, vision, what how and when. But this essay has gotten too long and I don't have the energy to continue further. Also, the ideas I have to express are conceptually different from this essay's theme. I'll cover them in successive essays.<br><br>


&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As I mentioned earlier, the idea of compiling all above neatly was an idea I had few days back. I wanted to write and organize my thoughts in order to tell myself that the reasons I am making this choice are valid, and I don't have any other option if I want get out of this vicious cycle, this Chakravyuh. But when one decides with [The Road Not Taken](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Road_Not_Taken#/media/File:RoadAtlantic.jpg), and all the people (barring few handful) one respects and loves don't agree, one feels scared. I was scared and wanted to justify myself in face of the volley of questions and disapproval I am going to get from the world. <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;I realise what started as a justification letter turned out be a Love Letter from me to me. I can now come back to this whenever fear strikes me and I feel paralysed. It's okay to jump over a ditch when there is seemingly smooth road adjacent, either because you want it that way or because you know that's the way. I will keep telling myself that it's okay to be myself. ❤️