---
layout: post
title: "Control"
description: ""
date: 23-12-17

---

Being in control is important. However, it doesn't necessarily mean dictating all the terms, defining all the rules. Of course, that is one definition of control. But, being in control also mean you understand the contraints and have the ability to find your way despite them, being in control also mean having the belief and ability that you would be able to find solution to problems and challenges. <br>
When at some fundamental level you feel you are not in control, you end up vacating the position of power. To fill that void, fear creeps in from the dark caves it resides in. It slithers away, touching various aspects of your mind. And once fear sits on the throne, it influences various aspect of your life - the more control you cede, the more influence fear exerts. 

Why I am writing this narrative ? The right answer, rather the complete answer will require providing a lot of context. It's too much effort though, enough to talk me out of completing this journal/essay. But I started this journey with some enthusiasm, and now I see a path of land I don't want to walk on. So what do I do ? Abandon this journey, or tread along ? Well, the answer is not where you are looking for. You need to ask two questions:<br> 

**Q:** Why do you want to give a complete answer ?<br>
**A:** So that the readers understands what I am talking about.<br>
**Q:** When you started writing, what was the motivation ? <br>
**A:** I wanted to express myself. This piece wasn't intended for an audience which maybe reads this at some time in the future. <br>

And there I have it - I don't need to provide the context. This was a personal endeavor, not a public one. 

However, facing this obstacle did help in shaping the narrative further. Control also means not feeling obligated. When I was facing the above conundrum, one part of me felt I *should* make my thoughts clear to the reader, I have an obligation towards him - for that's what a responsible author should do, paint the landscape in such a way so as to guide her through the painting. But that's not why I started this journal, my fingers were drawn to the keyboard because I wanted to express myself. And this narrative is at odds with honoring my allegiance with the reader. Being in control also means being selfish and not honoring expectations when you don't want to. Expectations, implicit or explicit, past or present, serves as impurity.



