---
layout: post
title: "(Lack of) Structure"
description: ""
date: 24-04-06
---

Saturday. April 06, 2024 <br>
10:58 AM <br>
Dining Table <br>

Parents are out, hence I am sitting here. This gave me an idea (which I have had before) to move the double bed in my room downstairs and bring the dining table upstairs. The reason for this change is following - what I like about this place (dining room) right now is that I have space backside, towards my left and towards my right. I can keep the door open and look outside for a while and then come back to my screen. As I am writing this, I can see a slew of problems, concerns that this conversation will beget. And though my initial reaction was of denial towards those problems, as I am writing this, I can see some value in them. Of course we’ll not know with certainty unless it becomes a reality, but I’d rather not take that plunge yet. I need to find alternatives. <br>
More than that, I am realising that the more boundaries I define for myself, the more conditions I decide for myself, the more distance I create between the real self and the potential self. I am going to, I am breaking down the barriers and create more space for me; I’ll not isolate myself on a self-made island. <br>

To give some context on the sentiment I shared in the above paragraph, after my session with PB Mam day before yesterday, I was rethinking my time table. She nudged me towards judging myself only on meditation first, and then add other variables like upskilling or workout. I was a little irritate at first - we were already halfway into the session and hadn’t discussed anything “meaningful”. I was under the impression that she hasn’t read my notes and using the ilegibile nature of the pages as an excuse - which added to my irrational feelings about her. <br>
As the hours progressed however, I saw value in her suggestion. Walking in that direction, I tinkered with my schedule and moved my productive hours towards the afternoon - from 2-7. The moment I did this, even though I had a huge amount of time to pursue my interests, I felt the pressure of not having covered everything. I felt paucity of time for not having done justice with all that I want to do. And that unsettled me. <br>
When I analysed this rationally, I realised that creating these structures is giving me anxieties - my desires and ambitions are so huge that they can’t be contained in structures. And when I see boundaries being created around what I want to do with the realization that these boundaries are limiting me, I panic. <br>
I reached a point where I was like - chuck this time table thingy. Let’s see how things go without it. Because creating and trying to adhering to schedules gives me headache. The moment I did that, the moment I let go of with these self made boundaries, I felt a very different kind of relief. I picture as if the shackles that were binding me came out themselves automatically and I felt some sensations throughout my body. It was nothing like that. But I did get a taste of freedom - I was not bound to do specific things at specific times. I could read my book at any time, and then I could puruse a MML rabbit hole if I want to or I could try to understand Protein Unfolding problem. Best, I could do nothing if that’s what I wanted. <br>
As I am writing this, I can hear a voice in my head - this is scary. What if I don’t study at all ? What if I go berserk and have no control over my desires, fancies, my cravings ? An inner voice comes and tells me - this is all coming from a deep distrust of myself, for my abilities. I don’t trust myself that I’ll be rational and study, that’s why I create guardrails around me. These guardrails work for few people, they stopped working for me some time back. Even when they worked for me, I wasn’t realising my potential - I was averaging. <br>
Anyway, once I realised I can do whatever I wanted, I also realised I can let my curiosity drive me. Curiosity is the force that drives you. While curiosity and intrigue pushes you forward, structures pull you. And there’s only so far external energy pull towards itself. The fuel, the actual action of combustion is happening somewhere else, obviously there’ll be a loss in power, a leakage in efficiency.
I am starting to trust myself that I’ll be able to veer towards homeostatis when the balance starts losing its equilibrium. I don’t need an external device, I don’t need to keep tally of how much time I have invested in which bucket  - it makes more harm than it creates value. If I evaluate this metric system - it has done more damage and less enhancement. <br>
A positive effect of the change I made yesterday is that I invested some time today morning to understand the nuances of Alphafold. What I did learn was minimal and I know there’s a lot of area to cover. But that’s not the point. The point is that I did pursue that coz of sheer curiosity and not because I was “supposed” to do it. When stopped looking at that video or chatting with ChatGPT, I didn’t feel exhausted. I think these small things matter. <br>

Of course this line of thought is true only to myself - there are a lot of people who have benefited from this metric system. And, again of course, I may be completely wrong wrt this way of function, but at least I would have explored this idea - I would have learned one more way of failure. 
