---
layout: post
title: "Justification"
description: ""
date: 23-12-28
2023-12-28-justification
---
Back in December 2020, a dear friend of mine started a tradition of hosting yearly awards ceremony amongst us friends. We are group of 8 guys (youngest member over 30, we are all man now). It's a wonderful tradition that we are proud and happy about. Among others, one great thing about this forum is that we allow each other to be vulnerable, we talk about our fears. In one previous edition, we spent 10-15 mins discussing how baldness has affected self-confidence amongst people. The examples sounds funny to me, but it also tells us about the freedome we give ourselves and each other - *small* things have *big* impact. Yesterday was the fourth edition of CARE (Chalante Awards for Relative Excellence, Chalante being the name of our group :smirk:). And that is the trigger for this post, though the thought of writing these thoughts has captured my mind for a long time. <br>

I am someone who thinks a lot and deeply - sometimes this causes problems (I end up in an action paralysis state), sometimes this gives me a significant clarity of thought. The former has happened more though, and there are reasons for that which I hope I'll come to later. <br>
After making the decision of quitting my job, I have had more mental bandwidth in the recent past. Deep reflections, letting go self-imposed mental burdens and obligations, and seeking help enabled me to understand that the opinion of others has a huge impact on the decisions I make on a daily basis - short-term and long-term both. What others think about me is a variable I always consider when deciding anything, and the weight given to this variable is very high. Generally, these are those people who are doing better than me professionally, they come from premium institutions, they work at Big companies with a proven track record - this is the sole metric ~~we~~ I have learned to define success. <br>


In every meeting, we have this section where each person reflects on their year - it serves as a group update given that everyone doesn't know everything about others; regular nxn updates gets affected in bigger groups, specially when guys become men :relieved:, and time is scarce. <br>
When the section started yesterday, I was feeling positive and was looking forward to my turn - 365 days are lot many days, and I had at least one major life update. But as I saw one friend after another speak, my enthusiasm went down. It happened because I saw every person speaking about their experiences, choices made with a kind of confidence which I was not feeling this particular evening. I was wary if what I say will resonate with these people, will my thoughts make sense; will the decision be received with enthusiasm and support, or it'll be looked at with skepticism, specially given that this is going to be my 3rd career break in ~4 years. This transition from high to low is a typical example of how deeper fears play out at surface level - how my mental state changes from ecstatic to that of despondency in a matter of minutes. <br>

Resigning is a risk I have taken, while my training in life has been to take the safe path always. Conversation with my manager around leaving the org took place on Dec 14 and I felt extremely relieved, light as feather when we decided my last working day would be Jan 31st. However, I went into self-doubt spiral in the following days. I am taking a hit at multiple levels
1. I am leaving at a time when my appraisal is due in 3/4 months. The facts that I didn't negotiate when I was getting hired for I was coming from a break and the tech industry was starting at a correction; and having done well in the past few months on a new responsibility I took in July, I am/was expecting a significant raise. 
2. It's not a high-pressure job and the way we work, I have ample time on my hands after carrying out my daily responsibilities. I can manage (at least on paper) 2-3 hours of personal work daily with a relaxed, flexible routine. I can (again, on paper) manage preparing for the next job while working on the current one easily. 
3. This will lead to another career break on my resume, and though these phases are finding acceptance in professional life, it's still something you have to convince your prospective employer.
4. Financial hit - apart from loss of monthly savings, I'll be burning money from my own pocket (I don't intend to find a job straightaway). 
5. And most importantly, **people's perception**, *log kya kahenge*. 

If I am to ask any *rational* person and givem then the above data points before letting them make an opinion, s/he will ask me to at least wait till appraisal and then resign. It's stupid to do otherwise.

Deep reflections I mentioned earlier gave me a glimpse of these fears/concerns and I spent reasonable time analysing the arguments and counter-arguments my mind produced. I started noting down what's causing my anxieties and started asking relevant and hard/difficult questions to tell myself why this was the only option I had, this was the only way to allay my fears and come out of the Chakravyuh I find myself in. It was clear to me when I started scribbling down my thoughts that I need to structure them and publish them - either on my blog or in my personal journals. I am choosing the former, primarily because I think (and have heard various people say) that vulnerability is a strength, not a weakness. The more we are closed, the more control we cede to fear. I am not going to keep this a secret to be shared with a select few, if at all. I'll lay my fears bare to see them in broad daylight, I'll throw down the gauntlet and not surrender.<br><br>


1. Given all the reasons listed above in favor of not resigning, what are the reasons I am leaving the org ?<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a. I suffer from a Hyper Responsibility Syndrome. I am not sure if that's a medical term, nor has any licensed professional has given this label to me. What I mean by the above is I am someone who is very righteous, to an extent where it has started affecting me negatively. Though my work doesn't require my full-time presence and I can log off for 2-3 hours after setting up the house in order, I feel obliged to be available for the entire time. Given that I manage a team of ~12 people plus I am the face of the team, I feel I am ethically supposed to make sure the machinery doesn't come to a halt because of my absence. What instagram and facebook does to people, Slack does to me - this led to being in a constant alert state even when no alarm is raised. I tried few times to am not capable of handling these 2 kind of orthogonal endeavours simultaneously.<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;b.appraisal question - rat race, what are you optimising. Cost of current and alternative options<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;c. As long you have a story to tell and you are honest, I think it's fine. Also, it's a problem I'll deal with when it surfaces. I think it'll boil down to finding the best fit. Worst case scenario, I'll have to start at a position which is junior to my current one. Willing to pay that price, not the current one. <br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;d. People will always say something. I want to follow my heart this time, not my mind. This is where I'll be happy.
2. I have the good fortune of being around smart people since at least 9th Grade. In the group of 8 people above, 5 went to one or the other IIT (I wasn't one of them), another did his second graduation from UCSF and the last is on a fast promo track (I think twice) working for a huge govt organization. I was surrounded by high-achievers during 6 early years of my career - both in flat and in office. It has been a blessing, but it has also been a curse. Eager to impress and enter the coveted club, I mistook their priorities as gold, adopted their personality while letting go of mine. I was never competitive, I became obsessed by being the best, I started chasing goals like never before. And when I couldn't move forward, I stressed about not achieving them, constantly thinking about the "lost opportunity". I stifled myself so that when others see me, they see a reflection of themselves and like me. <br>
I stopped living with these people and came home during Covid, but I brought these personality traits with me, they were stuck with me like slime clinging to my personality. It was not their fault, I am not shedding a negative light on these people - a lot of them are very good friends, for life. It was a vaccum inside which got filled, had it not been these people, there would have been others. <br>
These characteristics defined how I think, how I spend every second. Though I left these people in 3D space, they were always judging me in my mental space. In professional setting I was always running at full throttle, for I was trained myself (and consistently fed myself relevant content) in hustle culture. I stopped enjoying work on a daily basis and always thought about the future. The fact that boundaries between private and personal life were blurred didn't help, it only added fuel to the fire. With porous boundaries, this fire found it's way home as well - I started listening podcasts instead of music, while chosing a book to read I thought how it is going to help me get better, I can't watch sticoms coz I think it's a waste of time. <br>

With that mental pattern, whenever I tried working on changing my career track (yes, I did try to multi-task), I couldn't sustain. Anxiety got better of me every single time. It felt like standing in the middle of circular room with few doors, each door signifying one aspiration. A constant thought of time in my head - tick tock, tick tock, time is running out; I must act soon because I have to tick all these checkboxes. And the moment I took a step or two towards any of the doors, the importance of other doors magnified, the chosen door diminished. Back to centre, evaluating which door to pick. Tick tock, tick tock, time is running out and I must act soon; I must act soon because I have to tick all these checkboxes. Every iteration ended with I burning out and taking few days off completely, going all binge (which lead to a guilt cycle). This cycle repeated so many times that I started identifying with and anticipating various spokes of the wheel.

3. Lorem Ipsum




