---
layout: post
title: "Generative Adversarial Network(s)"
description: ""
redirect_from:
  - /2022/05/12/
date: 22-05-12

---

### What are GAN(s) ?
GAN is a neural network which helps in generating content. The first application of GAN was to generate an image, hence in the following literature, we'll talk in that language. However, GAN(s) are not limited to generating only images. 
> The "G" in GAN stands for "Generative".

In a GAN, there are 2 different neural networks which are playing a [minimax](2022-05-12-minimax.md) game with each other. One of the network is known as a Generator, denoted by G(z); the other is known as the Differentiator, denoted by D(x). 
> The "A" in GAN stands for "Adversarial", denoting the *adversarial* relationship between the Generator and the Discriminator.

You might have observed the difference between the input to G and the input to D. The input to G is from a fixed sample space taken from a [standard normal distribution](2022-05-12-standard-normal-distribution-rabbit-hole.md). This is denoted by a vector space *z*. The input to D is of two types:
1. The real data that the network is being trained on. This is denoted by *x*.
2. The output of Generator - more on this later.  

**Technical defintion:** GAN is a type of netowk that tries to understand (learn) the [distribution]((2022-05-12-standard-normal-distribution-rabbit-hole.md)) of the input data. Once learned the distribution of input data, the network should be able to generate new data having the same distribution.



---

Q. Why 1 - D(G(z)) ? 
	- That's because this transformation points the desires of the discriminator and Generator in consistent directions between the two terms in the equation. 
	- The discriminator wants to maximise the entire function, the generator wants to minimise the entire function.



- first term is the expectation of the log of the output of the discriminator when the input is from real data distribution.



---
**References::**
1. [A Friendly Introduction to Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8L11aMN5KY8)
2. [Understand the Math and Theory of GANs in ~ 10 minutes](https://youtu.be/J1aG12dLo4I)
3. [Pytorch Tutorial](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/beginner/dcgan_faces_tutorial.html#implementation)